>>> TWO DAYS AGO, ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER MADE A SORT
OF QUIET ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
GOVERNMENT PROGRAM WAS SCALING
BACK ON A PROGRAM YOU'VE
PROBABLY NEVER HEARD OF.
CIVIL ASSET FORFEITURE.
LET THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TAKE
YOUR MONEY WITHOUT CHARGING A
CRIME, THEY ONLY THINK THE MONEY
MAY HAVE BEEN USED AS SOME
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
OVER THE YEARS, THE PROGRAM HAS
BALLOONED TO THE POINT,
ACCORDING TO A RECENT WASHINGTON
POST INVESTIGATION, MORE THAN $2
BILLION HAS BEEN SEIZED.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER
SAID THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WILL
NO LONGER TAKE PART OF THE
PROCEDURES BUT DOESN'T MEAN THE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ENDS THERE.
THE CNN INVESTIGATION WITH SOME
TRULY EYE OPENING EXAMPLES OF
EXACTLY WHAT CAN HAPPEN.
GARY TUCHMAN INVESTIGATES.
>> Reporter: IT'S A BRIGHT CLEAR
MORNING IN APRIL 2013.
INSIDE THE RED CAR JUST AHEAD
ARE THESE TWO MEN.
ART DAVIS AND JOHN NUMAJINSKI
WHO HAPPEN TO BE PROFESSIONAL
POKER PLAYERS.
THIS DASH CAM FOOTAGE IN THE
DISTANCE, YOU CAN SEE THE RED
CAR FLASHING A TURN SIGNAL
INDICATE TO PASS A BLACK SUV.
THE FEW MINUTES LATER, AN IOWA
STATE TROOPER PULLS THEM OVER.
>> WHAT DID HE SNA.
>> HE SAID I DIDN'T USE MY
BLINKER.
AND HE WAS GOING TO WRITE ME A
CITATION THAT WOULD ONLY TAKE A
MINUTE.
GET IN THE CAR.
>> Reporter: IT WAS THE
BEGINNING OF AN ENCOUNTER THAT
WOULD EVENTUALLY BE TWO IOWA
STATE TROOPERS.
FOUND $85,000 IN CASH BELONGING
TO ART DAVIS AND ANOTHER $15,000
FROM JOHN.
>> THIS WAS THE BRIEFCASE.
IT WAS LOCKED.
THEY THREATENED TO DESTROY IT IF
I DIDN'T GET THE COMBINATION.
>> YOU CARRIED THIS FOR POKER.
>> I BROUGHT IT ALONG.
>> THIS IS NORMAL.
>> IT'S MONEY.
I GOT THAT FROM THE BANK.
>> HOW MUCH IS THIS?
>> THAT'S $10,000.
>> Reporter: THE TWO MEN WOUND
OCCUPY BEING QUESTIONED FOR
HOURS.
A TRAFFIC WARNING BUT NOT A
CITATION.
PLED GUILTY TO A MISDEMEANOR ON
CHARGE OF MARIJUANA
PARAPHERNALIA USED FOR MEDICAL
MARIJUANA.
TROOPERS LET THE MEN GO BUT TOOK
THE $100,000.
SEIZED THE AUTHORITIES SAY PART
OF AN INTERDIX BECAUSE THEY
CLAIM TO BE USED THE MONEY WAS
USED TO BUY DRUGS.
IT'S CALLED CIVIL ASSET
FORFEITURE AND THAT WASN'T ALL.
>> BASED ON THEIR BELIEF THEY
THOUGHT MY CLIENTS WERE INVOLVED
IN DRUG ACTIVITY CALL CALIFORNIA
WHERE THEY LIVE, INFORM THE
OFFICERS THERE OR LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS THERE THEY
BELIEVE THEY WERE INVOLVED IN
DRUG ACTIVITY, A SEARCH WARRANT
WAS OBTAINED ON THE BASIS OF
THAT INFORMATION FROM THE
OFFICER AND RAIDED THEIR HOMES
IN CALIFORNIA.
OKAY?
AND TORE THEIR HOMES APART
LOOKING FOR THINGS RELATING TO
DRUGS.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH THERE
WAS ONLY ONE MISDEMEANOR DRUG
CHARGE IN IOWA, CALIFORNIA
AUTHORITIES CLAIM THEY WERE
DISTRIBUTING DRUGS THERE.
THE MEN'S LAWYER GLEN DOWNIE
SAID JOHN WAS INDICTED.
AND IOWA SAID GIVE YOU BACK
$90,000 AS LONG AS YOU LET US
KEEP THE REST.
THE STATE OF IOWA KEPT $10,000
AND THE FELONY CHARGE IN
CALIFORNIA WAS DROPPED.
AS SHADY AS THE WHOLE AFFAIR
SOUNDS, IT WASN'T A ONE OFF.
IT'S PART OF A CONCERTED EFFORT
TO KEEP YOUR MONEY WITHOUT
FILING CHARGES.
THE TWO IOWA STATE TROOPERS AS
WELL AS THOUSANDS OF OTHER STATE
AND LOCAL COPS LEARN HOW TO
CONDUCT THESE STOPS FROM PRIVATE
COMPANIES AND THE BIGGEST ONE IS
OKLAHOMA COMPANY CALLED DESERT
SNOW.
>> THE DESERT SNOW TRAINERS
TRAVEL ALL OVER THE COUNTRY TO
HOLD THEIR WORKSHOPS AND
BUSINESS IS BRISK.
ACCORDING TO THE COMPANY'S WEB
SITE, 30 SEMINARS ARE SCHEDULED
FOR 2015.
FROM OREGON TO FLORIDA.
FROM DELAWARE TO CALIFORNIA.
AND YOUR POLICE DEPARTMENT COULD
BE ONE OF DESERT SNOW'S CLIENTS.
THIS IS THE MAN IN CHARGE OF
DESERT SNOW.
A FORMER CALIFORNIA STATE
HIGHWAY PATROL OFFICER NAMED JOE
DAVID.
HE WOULDN'T TALK WITH CNN ON
CAMERA, BUT A GLANCE AT WHAT HIS
COMPANY CHARGES POLICE AGENCIES
SHOWS HIS TRAINING ISN'T CHEAP.
THE LOWEST PRICE FOR A POLICE
FORCE TO ATTEND ACCORDING TO
THIS PRICE LIST IS A BIT OVER
$8,000.
AND THE TOP END?
$145,000.
>> WHY WOULD A POLICE DEPARTMENT
SPEND HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS TO GO TO A SEMINAR WHICH
IS SOMETHING YOU LEARN IN A
POLICE ACADEMY?
>> WELL, THEY SAY THEY TEACH
THEM MORE THAN THE POLICE
ACADEMY.
SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE TO TEACH
THESE OFFICERS HOW TO DO IT EVEN
BETTER.
I BELIEVE THE TRAINING
ENCOURAGES THEM TO TAKE MORE
CASH BECAUSE THE MORE CASH THEY
TAKE, THE MORE CASH JOE DAVID IS
GOING TO GET IN TRAINING
MATERIALS.
>> Reporter: JOE DAVID TOLD US
HE COULDN'T ANSWER WRITTEN
QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW MANY
OFFICERS HE TRAINED OR HOW MUCH
MONEY HE'S MADE BECAUSE OF A
LAWSUIT FILED BY DOWNY.
AS FOR SEE SURES, HE SAID, THE
PURPOSE IS NOT TO TAKE AND SEIZE
FUNDS BELONGING TO INNOCENT
PEOPLE.
IS TO SEIZE FUNDS TIED TO
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY BUT THERE HAVE
BEEN NO CHARGES THAT THE MONEY
TAKEN FROM BART DAVIS OR JOHN
HAVE BEEN CRIMINAL.
WHAT HAS THIS DONE IN YOUR LIFE?
>> MADE ME AWARE OF THINGS I WAS
NOT AWARE OF AND MADE ME ANGRY.
HOW CAN YOU NOT BE ANGRY?
>> Reporter: THE MEN WANT THE
REST OF THEIR MONEY BACK, THE
$10,000 KEPT BY THE STATE OF
IOWA BUT IOWA HAS NOT GIVEN IT
BACK AND IS NOT BACKING DOWN.
>> HMM.
GARY TUCHMAN JOINS US.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, AS I SAID
ERIC HOLDER, MADE THIS DECISION
PROHIBITING SOME OF THESE
FORFEITURES.
THE IMPACT THOUGH IS GOING TO BE
PRETTY MINIMAL, RIGHT?
>> RIGHT.
THIS IS THE FIRST STEP.
THERE WILL BE PLENTY OF
FORFEITURES BUT THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL SAID UNLESS IT'S A
PUBLIC SAFETY ISSUE, THAT
FEDERAL AGENCIES CAN NO LONGER
KEEP THE MONEY THAT LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS SEND TO WASHINGTON
UNDER FEDERAL LAW.
A LOT OF TIMES, LOCAL AGENCIES
WANT TO USE FEDERAL LAW BECAUSE
IT'S A STRONGER LAW, IT'S MORE
STREAMLINED, IT'S LESS BU
BUREAUCRATIC.
THAT IS NO LONGER